ID,Text
2|| Abstract Background  Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a heterogeneous group of disorders with a number of genetic and proteomic alterations. c-CBL is an E3 ubiquitin ligase and adaptor molecule important in normal homeostasis and cancer. We determined the genetic variations of c-CBL, relationship to receptor tyrosine kinases (EGFR and MET), and functionality in NSCLC.  Methods and Findings  Using archival formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) extracted genomic DNA, we show that c-CBL mutations occur in somatic fashion for lung cancers. c-CBL mutations were not mutually exclusive of MET or EGFR mutations; however they were independent of p53 and KRAS mutations. In normal/tumor pairwise analysis, there was significant loss of heterozygosity (LOH) for the c-CBL locus (22%, n = 8/37) and none of these samples revealed any mutation in the remaining copy of c-CBL. The c-CBL LOH also positively correlated with EGFR and MET mutations observed in the same samples. Using select c-CBL somatic mutations such as S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802* (obtained from Caucasian, Taiwanese and African-American samples, respectively) transfected in NSCLC cell lines, there was increased cell viability and cell motility.  Conclusions  Taking the overall mutation rate of c-CBL to be a combination as somatic missense mutation and LOH, it is clear that c-CBL is highly mutated in lung cancers and may play an essential role in lung tumorigenesis and metastasis.  Go to: Introduction In the US alone, each year approximately 219,400 people are diagnosed with lung cancers, out of which more than 145,000 of them succumb to the disease [1]. This number is roughly equivalent to the combined mortality rates of cancers of the breast, prostate, colon, liver, kidney and melanoma [1]. In addition the prognosis is usually poor and the five-year survival rate is less than 15%. There are also significant ethnic differences for lung cancer, and the outcome is worse for blacks compared to whites. Gender differences are also striking with women having significantly better prognosis as compared to men. There are a number of genetic alterations that can occur in lung cancer. As an example, in NSCLC, mutations in KRAS, p53, EGFR and MET have been identified. Many of these pathways, especially Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs) are controlled by c-CBL.  CBL (Casitas B-lineage lymphoma) is a mammalian gene located on human chromosome 11q23.3 [2] and is involved in cell signaling and protein ubiquitination [3]. CBL proteins belong to the RING finger class of ubiquitin ligases (E3) and there are three homologues c-CBL, CBL-b, CBL-3 [4]. The c-CBL and CBL-b genes are ubiquitously expressed with the highest levels in hematopoietic tissues [5]. c-CBL consists of four regions encoding for functionally distinct protein domains: the N-terminal tyrosine kinase binding (TKB) domain, the linker region, the catalytic RING finger domain, the proline-rich region and the c-terminal ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain that also overlaps with a leucine-zipper (LZ) domain [3]. Both TKB and RING finger domains are essential for ligand-induced ubiquitination of RTKs [6], [7], [8], [9]. The RING finger domain is required for the recruitment of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. The TKB domain includes four-helix bundle (4H), a calcium-biding EF hand, and a modified SH2 domain, which binds to phosphotyrosine residues [3], [10], [11], [12]. In addition, the proline-rich region of c-CBL can associate with the SH3 domain of Grb2, which can indirectly recruit c-CBL to RTKs via the GRB2 adaptor protein [7], [13], [14].  c-CBL also binds to EGFR and acts as the E3 that targets EGFR for ubiquitination and degradation. Furthermore, CBL desensitizes EGF signaling and opposes cellular proliferation induced by EGF [15]. EGF activation also appears to activate the tyrosine kinase SRC, which phosphorylates c-CBL and in turn activates the ubiquitination and degradation of EGFR [16], [17], [18]. A recent study shows that defective endocytosis of EGFR is characterized by a deletion mutant and the point mutation L858R, whereby its association with c-CBL and subsequent ubiquitination are impaired [19]. Recently, the first human c-CBL mutations were reported in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients [20]. The mutation R420Q inhibits FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) internalization and ubiquitination [20].  Not only can E3 activity be important in oncogenesis, c-CBL has a dual but separate function as a signal transduction molecule. We have previously shown that c-CBL is important in binding CRKL and BCR/ABL in hematopoietic cells. Also, it can bind and modulate functions of cytoskeleton by binding to proteins like talin and paxillin. The TKB domain is important in binding to a number of molecules, and they then function in signal transduction.  Given the critical role of CBL in normal homeostasis and cancer, we hypothesized that it might be mutated in lung cancers. In this study, we report novel c-CBL somatic mutations S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802* in Caucasian, Taiwanese and African-American lung cancer patients, respectively. Expressing these mutations in NSCLC cell lines lead to increased proliferation and cell motility. We show that c-CBL mutations occur with or without MET or EGFR mutations but are mutually exclusive of a LOH at the c-CBL locus. Additionally, c-CBL LOH is associated with either MET or EGFR mutations. We thus hypothesize that c-CBL mutations might contribute to the oncogenic potential of MET and EGFR in lung cancer.  Go to: Methods Ethics Statement  Written consent on all research on human subjects has been obtained from the Institutional Review Board, University of Chicago and covers all research performed in the laboratory. The following is their contact information: Institutional Review Board, The University of Chicago, McGiffert Hall, 5751 S. Woodlawn Ave., 2nd floor, Chicago, IL 60637. Written informed consents were received from all patients whose tissue samples were used for this study.  Tissue Samples  Lung cancer tissue and paired adjacent normal lung tissues were obtained from 50 Caucasian, 29 African-Americans and 40 Taiwanese NSCLC patients who were recruited at the University of Chicago Hospital (Chicago, USA) (Caucasian and African-American patients) and Taipei Veterans General Hospital of Taiwan (Taiwanese patients) after obtaining appropriate Institutional Review Board permission and informed consent from the patients. Out of 119 samples, 77 were men, 38 were women and 4 were unknown with age at diagnosis ranging from 47 to 90 years. In terms of tumor types, 53 were adenocarcinoma, 32 were squamous cell carcinoma and 34 were large cell carcinoma. 49 were stage I, 14 were stage II, 34 were stage III, and 13 were stage IV (Table S1).  Cell Culture  Human non-small cell lung carcinoma cells A549 and H358 were maintained in DMEM and RPMI-1640, respectively. Human embryonic kidney 293T cells were cultured in DMEM. Media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml of penicillin, and 100 µg/ml of streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2.  c-CBL Gene Mutational Analysis  Exons 2 to 16 of c-CBL gene were individually amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Primers are listed in Table S2. PCR conditions were 1 cycle of 95°C for 5 minutes; 35 cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 58°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 2 minutes; and one cycle of 72°C for 10 minutes. PCR products were treated with ExoSAP-IT (USB Corporation, Cleveland, OH) and sequenced by Big-Dye Terminator Chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Sequencing was performed on the forward coding strand with confirmation of c-CBL alterations performed by sequencing the reverse strand as well. Chromatograms were analyzed for mutations using Mutation Surveyor v2.61 (Softgenetics, State College, PA).  Plasmid Constructs and Site-Directed Mutagenesis  The wild-type c-CBL cDNA insert was subcloned into the pAlterMax expression vector using XhoI and SalI restriction enzyme sites (Promega, Madison, WI). Using this parental plasmid pAlterMax-c-CBL, the TKB domain double mutation (S80N/H94Y), the point mutation (Q249E), and the C-terminal point mutation W802* of c-CBL were created using the following primers: 5′-GCTGGCGCTAAAGAATAACCCACCTTATATCTTAGAC-3′ and 5′-CTACCAGATACCTACCAGTATCTCCGTACTATCTTGTC-3′ for the double mutation S80N/H94Y; 5′-CTTTACCCGACTCTTTGAGCCCTGGTCCTCTTTGC-3′ for Q249E, and 5′-CAGCTCCTCCTTTGGCTGATTGTCTCTGGATGGTGATC-3′ for W802* along with their complementary primers using the QuickChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis XL kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The constructs were confirmed for the point mutations by standard DNA sequencing of both strands.  Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) Analysis  Five microsatellites on chromosome 11 (3 on 11q at or within 200 kb up or downstream of the c-CBL gene and 2 control markers on 11p) were selected for analysis (Table S3). Established microsatellite markers and respective primer sequences were selected from the GeneLoc database (http://genecards.weizmann.ac.il/geneloc/index.shtml, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel). Primers were custom designed and each forward primer was fluorescently labeled at the 5′ end with FAM, PET, NED, or VIC (Applied Biosystems). Primer annealing temperatures and duplex scores were evaluated with NIST Primer Tools (http://yellow.nist.gov:8444/dnaAnalysis/primerToolsPage.do; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD). Primers were verified by performing PCR with control DNA (isolated from TK6 cells) and resolving the products on agarose gels. Bands were visualized with an UV transilluminator. Genomic DNA was extracted from tumor samples and paired normal lung tissue. Primers were grouped into multiplex combinations shown in Table S4. Marker D11S929 served as an internal control to check for consistency in PCRs and of peaks from capillary electrophoresis. Multiplex PCRs were carried out in a volume of 10 µL that contained 1 µL genomic DNA (20–50 ng), 0.5 µM of each primer (1.0 µM total for each primer pair), 400 µM dNTPs, 1X PCR buffer containing MgCl2, and 0.2 U Taq DNA polymerase. PCR was performed on the ABI GeneAmp 9700 PCR System under the following conditions: 5 min at 94°C; 30 cycles of 30 sec at 94°C, 1 min at 60°C, 1 min at 72°C; and 5 min at 72°C. The PCR products were separated by capillary electrophoresis on an ABI 3130XL DNA Analyzer. Chromatograms were analyzed with Peak Scanner 1.0 and GeneMapper 3.7 software (Applied Biosystems) for allelic alterations. The area of the peaks produced by the DNA PCR products was quantified for each allele. The ratio of the allelic areas was calculated for each tumor and paired normal DNA sample. When the qLOH (allelic ratio for the tumor peaks divided by the allelic ratio of paired normal sample) was ≤0.5 or ≥2.0 for c-CBL and at least one other 11q marker in at least two separate experiments, the sample was considered as having an allelic imbalance and interpreted as LOH. Samples were evaluated in at least two separate experiments and samples showing prospective LOH at c-CBL repeated a third time which included a new control marker at the BAX locus (data not shown) on chromosome 19 to verify integrity of sample DNA.  Transfection of c-Cbl Constructs  The A549 cell line was transfected using the Fugene HD (Roche, Nutley, NJ) reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. Eight µg of plasmid DNA, containing either no insert (empty vector), wild-type c-CBL, S80N/H94Y c-CBL, Q249E c-CBL or W802* CBL was used for transfection in a 6-well culture plate. Cells were harvested 48 h after transfection and analyzed for expression.  c-CBL Knockdown  c-CBL knockdown was performed using lentiviral transduction using MISSION lentiviral transduction particles (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) as per manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 1×105 H358 cells/well were seeded in 6-well plates and infected the following day with c-CBL lentiviral shRNA constructs. To generate stable c-CBL knockdown cell lines, cells were selected for 2 days with 1 µg/ml puromycin. c-CBL levels were determined using whole cell lysates by immunoblotting with anti-CBL antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA).  Cell Viability Assay  Cells were transfected as described above in the transfection assay. Forty-eight hours after transfection, viability of cells was assessed using Trypan Blue exclusion.  Wound Healing Assay  A549 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and cultured for 48 h until 100% confluent. The medium was then changed and the cells were transfected as described in the transfection assay. Twelve hours after transfection, a straight scratch was made across the cell layer using a 1 ml pipette tip. The cells were then gently washed with 1× PBS to remove cellular debris and the media was replaced. Photographs were taken of the wound region every 12 h until 48 h.  Western Blot Analysis  Forty eight hours after transfection, cells were collected and washed twice in 1X PBS, then lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (0.5M Tris-HCl with pH 7.4, 1.5 M NaCl, 2.5% deoxycholic acid, 10 mM EDTA, 10% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 5 µg/mL leupeptin, and 10 µg/mL aprotinin) for 5 minutes. The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C, and protein content of the supernatant was measured. Total cell lysates (50 µg/well) were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and the gels transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ). Membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk in phosphate-buffered saline containing Tween-20 (PBST) (1X PBS, 0.1% Tween-20) for 1 h at room temperature and incubated with the appropriate primary antibody at 4°C overnight. Membranes then were washed three times with PBST and probed with appropriate horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. The membranes were again washed three times in PBST and bands were visualized using Western blot chemiluminescence reagent (BioRad, Valencia, CA) on a Chemidoc Gel documentation system (BioRad, Valencia, CA). Antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies and used at the following dilutions (c-CBL, 1∶5000; c-MET, 1∶5000; EGFR, 1∶5000; ubiquitin, 1∶1000; HA, 1∶5000 and β-actin, 1∶10,000).  Flow Cytometry  Cell cycle analysis was carried out by flow cytometry. Approximately 2×106 cells were grown in media containing 10% FBS. Cells were harvested by trypsin/EDTA treatment, washed with 1X PBS three times and fixed with ice-cold 70% ethanol for 2 h. Cells were washed again with cold PBS and stained with a solution containing 25 µg/mL propidium iodide, 200 µg/mL RNase A, and 0.1% Triton X-100 for 30 minutes in the dark. Cell cycle analysis was performed using a Guava PCA-96 flow cytometer (Guava Technologies, Millipore, Billerica, MA).  Ubiquitin Ligase Activity  293T cells were maintained in culture in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin (100 units/mL) and streptomycin (100 µg/mL) were transfected with 0.2 µg EGFR-pcDNA3 and 2 µg HA-tagged c-CBL constructs as indicated using calcium phosphate according to manufacturer's protocol (Profection, Promega, Madison, WI). Twenty-four hours post-transfection, cells were starved overnight in DMEM supplemented with 0.5% FBS, and then treated with or without EGF (100 ng/ml) for 15 min. The cells were collected and washed two times in ice-cold PBS containing 0.2 mM sodium orthovanadate then lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100, 10% Glycerol, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate and protease inhibitors). Lysates were cleared of debris by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. EGFR immunoprecipitations were performed on 200 µg of cleared lysate using 250 ng of rabbit-anti-EGFR and Protein A/G Plus Sepharose overnight at 4°C. Precipitations were washed 5 times in lysis buffer before boiling in Laemmli buffer. Elutions were immunoblotted with anti-ubiquitin and EGFR. Twenty micrograms of cleared lysate were immunoblotted for each of the c-CBL constructs using anti-HA.  Statistical Analysis  Mutation rates between different groups were compared using Fisher's exact test. For continuous variables, group comparisons were performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Sidak's adjustment for multiple comparisons. Experiments involving repeated measurements over time were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA with the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment to the degrees of freedom. Analyses were conducted using STATA (v10.1) software (Stata Corporation, College Station, TX).  Go to: Results c-CBL Gene Mutations in Lung Cancer  To investigate the role of c-CBL in lung cancer, we analyzed its genomic DNA in tumor and paired normal samples drawn from multiple ethnicities. The lung tumor samples represented Caucasians (n = 50), African-Americans (n = 29), and Taiwanese (n = 40) lung cancer patients. We designed 12 pairs of primers to sequence the coding region of c-CBL gene that spans exons 2 to 16 (Table S2). We identified 8 unique somatic mutations in c-CBL exons among 8 different patients. A variation L620F, a known SNP (rs2227988) in exon 11 was also detected. Importantly, the eight novel non-synonymous mutations were confirmed by sequencing both strands of c-CBL genomic DNA obtained from lung tumor samples (Table 1). Moreover, none of the 8 mutations were detected in the corresponding normal tissue, indicating that these were somatic mutations. Four synonymous single nucleotide variations (SNVs) were also identified but were not used further in this study.  Table 1 Table 1 c-CBL mutation analysis in 119 lung cancer patient tumor tissues. Three of the 8 novel non-synonymous mutations were located in the TKB (tyrosine kinase binding) domain (S80N, H94Y, and Q249E), one in the RING finger domain (V391I), one in the proline-rich region (72515_72517 del ATG), and three in the C-terminal region (W802*, R830K, and A848T) of the c-CBL protein (Figure 1A and Figure S1). In Figure 1B, we show model chromatograms of representative samples.  Figure 1 Figure 1 c-CBL mutations and LOH in non-small cell lung cancer. 11q LOH of c-CBL Gene  Paired lung tumor and normal lung tissue samples from Taiwanese patients (n = 37) were investigated for LOH. Eight (21.6%) showed LOH at the c-CBL locus on chromosome 11 while 29 samples (78.4%) revealed normal allelic contribution at the microsatellite markers (Figures 1C and D).  c-CBL Mutations in Different Ethnic Groups  The c-CBL double mutant S80N/H94Y was found in the same patient and the overall mutation rate for c-CBL in lung tumors was 6.7% (8/119). The frequency of c-CBL mutation was highest in large cell carcinoma (14.7%; 5 of 34 patients) followed by squamous carcinoma (6.3%; 2 of 32 patients) and the least was observed in adenocarcinoma (AD) (1.8%; 1 of 53 patients), although these rates were not statistically significant (p = 0.292). Mutation rates were 6.0% among Caucasians (0 of 20 in AD; 0 of 10 in SQ; and 3 of 20 in LC), 13.8% in African-Americans (1 of 10 in AD; 1 of 10 in SQ; and 2 of 9 in LC), and 2.5% (0 of 23 in AD; 1 of 12 in SQ; and 0 of 5 in LC) in the Taiwanese population. Additionally two Taiwanese patients with lung cancer (one squamous and one adenocarcinoma) had the known SNP L620F. Ethnic differences were not statistically significant, however the power to detect differences was low.  Mutations in MET and EGFR Can Be Co-Associated with c-CBL Alterations  Since East Asians with lung cancer have a higher frequency of EGFR and MET mutations in lung tumors [21], [22], we also determined mutations in EGFR and MET in the same Taiwanese cohort samples and compared the results with the observed c-CBL alterations (LOH and/or mutations). In the 37 samples tested, we did not find any overlap between c-CBL mutations and c-CBL LOH (Figure 2). Of the three c-CBL mutants (including the known L620F SNP, rs2227988), one of the samples had a MET mutation (N375S) and the other had an EGFR mutation (L858R). Among the 8 samples that had a LOH at the c-CBL locus 5 had an additional mutation in MET (N375S) and 2 had an EGFR exon 19 deletion. Twenty-six samples had neither c-CBL mutation nor c-CBL LOH (3 patients had a c-CBL mutation but no c-CBL LOH). Among these 26 samples 9 had a MET mutation (8 N375S, 1 L211W), 13 had an EGFR mutation (7 exon 9 deletion, 6 L858R) and 4 had no other MET or EGFR mutation. Thus the rate of MET or EGFR mutations among patients with LOH at the c-CBL locus (7 of 8) was similar to that seen in patients without c-CBL mutation or LOH (22 of 26 patients) (p = 0.99). These 4 patients with no identifiable mutation in c-CBL, MET or EGFR represented 10.8% of the 37 patients analyzed in the Taiwanese patient cohort. Conversely, 89.2% Taiwanese lung cancer patients have an identifiable mutation in either c-CBL, MET or EGFR or a combination of the three genes (Figure 2). Additionally, we determined p53 and KRAS mutations in these Taiwanese cohorts. Two p53 and 1 KRAS mutation were detected. The single KRAS mutation overlapped with one p53 mutation. This patient also had the EGFR exon 19 deletion but had no c-CBL mutation. The other p53 mutation sample had a c-CBL LOH with concurrent MET N375S mutation. Thus, in the Taiwanese samples analyzed, p53/KRAS mutations and c-CBL mutations were mutually exclusive (data not shown).  Figure 2 Figure 2 c-CBL mutations and relationship to MET and EGFR mutations in lung cancer. Cellular Functions of c-CBL Alterations in the Context of Lung Tumorigenesis  A. E3 activity is intact in the mutant c-CBL proteins To investigate whether the different c-CBL mutations affect the E3 activity, EGFR was chosen as a model substrate for c-CBL E3 function. All of the c-CBL mutants tested enhanced ubiquitination of the activated EGFR similar to the wild-type c-CBL protein. This result demonstrates that the catalytic activity of the c-CBL mutants is not impaired when EGFR was the substrate. (Figure 3A).  Figure 3 Figure 3 Ubiquitination, viability, expression and cell cycle analysis of various c-CBL mutants. B. Effect on lung cancer cell viability The effect of a representative c-CBL mutant from each of the three ethnic backgrounds on lung cancer cell viability in cell lines was determined. S80N/H94Y double mutation, Q249E, and W802* were identified in lung tumor samples obtained from a Caucasian, a Taiwanese and an African-American, respectively. As described in methods, the c-CBL wild-type (WT) and the above three mutants were expressed after cloning them into pAlterMax vector in A549 cells. These cells express relatively low basal levels of endogenous c-CBL (data not shown). Transfection efficiency was comparable between different groups and the number of cells transfected with c-CBL wild-type construct was about 70% compared to control cells that were transfected with the empty vector. Cells transfected with S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802* c-CBL mutant constructs resulted in increased number of viable cells that was 132.3%, 120.8% and 147.9% higher respectively, relative to the empty vector control transfected cells and significantly different from the wild-type construct (p = 0.022, p = 0.049, and p = 0.008, respectively) (Figure 3B). Relative levels of c-CBL protein in whole cell lysates prepared from samples obtained from a parallel experiment was determined. The c-CBL protein levels in samples representing untransfected and empty vector transfected cells were comparable and those representing the c-CBL WT and the three c-CBL mutants were comparable (Figure 3C).  C. Effect on cell cycle To investigate if the increases in cell viability in different c-CBL mutants are due to increased cellular proliferation, a cell cycle analysis was performed. A549 cells were transfected with the c-CBL WT or the three different mutants: S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802*. The empty vector transfectant was used as a control. Forty-eight hours after transfection cell cycle analysis was performed as described in materials and methods. There was no significant change in the subG1, G1 or the S phase of the cell cycle among the different mutants compared to the WT construct (p = 0.64, p = 0.40, and p = 0.28, respectively). The G2/M phase of the cell cycle showed an increase in cell numbers for the three mutants, S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802*, when compared to the WT but again the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.25) (Figure 3D).  D. Effect on cell motility To investigate the effect of the expression of the above three c-CBL mutants on cell migration, we carried out wound healing assay as described in materials and methods. The closing of the scratch or the wound was monitored at 0, 12, 24, 36, and 48 h. (Figure 4A). In all the samples, that represented cells transfected with mutants, the wound gap was much smaller than that seen in the sample that represented cells transfected with c-CBL WT (p<0.001). We also determined the rate of wound closure for all the five groups. At 48 h, wild-type c-CBL transfectants showed 61.1% open wound while the S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802* mutants showed 18.7%, 23.9% and 34.3% open wound respectively (p<0.001) (Figure 4B).  Figure 4 Figure 4 c-CBL mutations affect wound healing in A549 cells. E. c-CBL knockdown increases cell viability It is hypothesized that the LOH seen in our samples could lead to decreased expression of c-CBL. Thus we tested the effect of c-CBL knockdown in lung cancer cells. Compared to A549, H358 lung cancer cells express relatively high levels of endogenous c-CBL (data not shown). c-CBL expression was knocked down using lentiviral construct that expressed c-CBL specific shRNA and compared the results with those that were transduced with scrambled shRNA and the results are shown in Figure 5. We identified several clones that revealed varying degrees of c-CBL knockdown showing different sets of c-CBL lentiviral shRNA knockdown efficiency (Figure 5A). Of all the clones tested, Clone 27 was chosen for further experiments. Equal amount of cells were seeded in a 6-well plate and the cell proliferation was measured at various times and the results are depicted in Figure 5B. As expected, number of cells increased in a time dependent fashion from 100 to 190% relative to scrambled shRNA as control in a span of 48 h (p = 0.0002) (Figure 5B). The cell cycle phases in H358 cells that were knocked down with c-CBL shRNA were looked at and compared with the scrambled shRNA. There were no discernable differences between these two constructs in the different phases of the cell cycle (data not shown).  Figure 5 Figure 5 Knockdown of c-CBL using an shRNA increases cell proliferation. Go to: Discussion Our results demonstrate that c-CBL is somatically mutated (or has LOH) in lung cancers, and can significantly contribute to enhanced cell viability and motility. There was also a high prevalence of LOH with respect to c-CBL in lung tumors that harbored MET or EGFR mutation.  In the present study, we have demonstrated the occurrence of c-CBL mutations in lung cancer patients, especially with different ancestral variations. Mutations in c-CBL have been recently reported in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and myeloid malignancies. In the AML study, the mutation R420Q located in the junction of the RING finger and the linker region inhibited FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) internalization and ubiquitination [20], thus contributing to the gain-in-function for the RTK. In addition, mutations such as H398Y, C384R, and L380P mapped to the RING finger domain and the linker region of c-CBL that is required for its E3 activity [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. Additionally, homozygous mutations in the RING finger domain of the c-CBL gene were described as a result of acquired Uniparental Disomy (UPD) [26]. It is important to note that our results indicate LOH at 11q23 locus and these are mutually exclusive from missense mutations of c-CBL. The somatic mutations were all heterozygous. The mutations in AML led to abrogation of the E3 activity leading to prolonged RTK activation. In addition mutants located on the linker region surrounding the RING finger domain exhibited enhanced AKT signaling in response to cytokine stimulation [26]. In addition, it was shown in NH3T3 cells, that neither mutations in the RING finger nor the linker region causes transformation, however while certain mutations perturbs the ubiquitination, others affect receptor recycling and prolong kinase activity [28].  We report here c-CBL mutations that mapped not only to the RING finger domain, but also to the TKB domain, proline-rich domain and the C-terminal region, but none mapped to the linker region as reported in the AML studies described above [23], [24], [25], [26], [29]. In addition, 8 mutants that we detected were found in different ethnic backgrounds. For example, S80N/H94Y, Q249E, W802* were detected in Caucasians, Taiwanese and African-Americans, respectively. The results point out not only the difference between lung cancer and other cancers, but also genetic polymorphism among different races in the same cancer. Interestingly, there is a large disparity between African-American and other ethnic populations with lung cancer [30]. We have previously shown that there was a low frequency of EGFR and MET mutation in African-Americans as compared with Taiwanese and Caucasians [31]. In this study, the number of African-American samples analyzed was relatively fewer and we found 3 mutations that are unique to this ethnicity. It would now behoove us to further study the genetic alterations that can occur and determine the targeted therapeutics for African-Americans. Our results provide evidence of the importance of c-CBL in tumorigenesis and potential signaling. Our prediction, based on the AML data, would be that the V391I RING finger domain mutation would affect the E3 activity. Also, it will be important to determine the binding partners for c-CBL in the TKB domain and proline rich domain mutations. It has previously been shown that the TKB domain can bind to growth factor receptors and it will be important to determine the cross-binding of these mutants to MET and or EGFR. It would also be important in the future to look at fluorescence in situ hybridization/copy number changes in c-CBL in lung cancer.  c-CBL plays an important role in down regulating RTK-mediated signaling through K63 poly-ubiquitination and subsequent downregulation of RTKs followed by lysosomal degredation [3]. Mono-ubiquitination or ubiquitinated with K63-linked chains of substrates by c-CBL may lead to enhancement of biological and biochemical functions (reviewed in Hermann et al, 2007 [32]). The mutations that we analyzed in our studies all point out to the fact that the E3 activity of c-CBL on EGFR is intact; the EGFR levels in the various mutants remain same (Figure S2). Multiple kinases, both RTKs and non-RTKs could be acted upon by c-CBL, including ERBs, PDGFR, FMS, MET, c-Kit, VEGFR, FLT-1, RON, FGFR, IR, as well as SYK, FYN, LCK, FGR, LYN and c-ABL [3]. In lung cancers the relevant substrates of c-CBL in terms of degradation or signal transduction are yet to be identified.  The observation that c-CBL somatic mutations, especially S80N/H94Y, Q249E and W802* showed increased cell viability and cell motility that is in agreement with the physiological role for D-cbl in the regulation of apoptosis and differentiation identified in Drosophila is very significant [33]. It has been previously shown that activating c-CBL mutation downregulates EGFR signaling and decreases cellular proliferation and migration in breast cancer cell lines [34]. Although the role of c-CBL in the negative regulation of RTKs is well substantiated, thereby suggesting that it is a natural tumor suppressor, studies in cancer cells have revealed both tumor suppressor and tumor promoting activities depending on the type of c-CBL mutation and the number of alleles at the c-CBL locus [24]. In agreement with the above, the three c-CBL mutants described here appear to have tumor growth and metastasis promoting properties. Although these mutants are outside of the RING finger or the linker region of c-CBL, their downstream effects are significant so as to cause increased proliferation and migration, but the substrate affected by these mutations are not known yet. This raises the possibility that some of the cellular functions of c-CBL are independent of its ubiquitin-ligase activity, an area that we are currently investigating. The oncogenic nature of RTKs, addiction of cancers to growth signals and given the clustering of c-CBL, EGFR and MET mutations, it is possible that the transforming effect of c-CBL mutations is most likely a combinatorial effect of the three. We also show that LOH for c-CBL was found in a significant number of samples that harbored MET or EGFR mutations. The fact that about 7% of lung tumor samples are likely to have c-CBL mutations and an additional 22% are likely to harbor c-CBL-related LOH, makes c-CBL a highly mutated molecule in lung cancer. Since LOH alone is not enough to cause a transforming event [35], [36], [37], associated mutation in the MET or EGFR locus or yet another RTK discussed above may play a role in carcinogenesis. We predict that this LOH in c-CBL results in haploinsufficiency that downplays RTK ubiquitination leading to hyperactivity of the RTKs. However, whether this is sufficient cause for tumorigenesis remains to be determined. Consistent with our hypothesis is the fact that c-cbl-/- mice have increased kinase activity in lymphocytes, but is not sufficient for tumor formation [35], [36], [37]. c-CBL LOH could also lead to increased expression of c-CBL from the other allele to compensate for a loss of an allele. Alternately, there could be some form of synergy working with reduced c-CBL levels and mutated receptors that exacerbate the phenotype of each alone.  Previous studies from our lab and others have shown that East Asians with lung cancers have relatively high frequencies of gain-of-function of mutations in RTKs such as EGFR and MET [31]. In a cohort of Japanese patients an activating MET mutation was identified in the splice region that deletes the juxtamembrane domain that is involved E3 activity of c-CBL [38]. This study also found that activation of MET is mutually exclusive of EGFR, KRAS and HER2 gene mutations [38]. We failed to detect such mutations in significant numbers in lung tumor samples obtained from African-Americans (n = 29) and Caucasian (n = 50) patients. One MET mutation was identified in each of the groups whereas 1 and 3 EGFR mutations were identified in the African-American and Caucasian cohorts respectively. EGFR mutations have earlier been identified as one of the key mutations affecting lung adenocarcinoma patients in a comprehensive study of 188 patients [39]. Our study encompasses different histologies of NSCLC. However, the published series did not find any mutations in c-CBL or MET unlike our study that encompassed different subtypes of NSCLC. It is important to note, we have recently shown that MET mutations in lung cancer are in majority germline [31]. We have reported earlier c-CBL mutations in a small cohort of Taiwanese lung cancer samples [40]. In our efforts to understand the ethnic differences in the lung oncogenome, we also looked at PAX transcription factors such as PAX5 and PAX8 that are highly expressed in lung cancers; however there was no preferential expression or mutations of the above genes in lung tumor samples of African-Americans. In this study, we show relatively high frequency of c-CBL mutations in lung cancers, especially in the large cell type among Caucasians and particularly among African-Americans. We therefore propose c-CBL as an efficacious target for lung cancers in African-Americans that needs to be further substantiated. This is all the more important because the prognosis for African-Americans with lung cancer, especially for men is much poorer compared to their Caucasian counterparts [41].  In conclusion, the results presented in this study demonstrate that c-CBL is frequently mutated or even lost in lung cancers. Our results support a role for c-CBL mutants that are independent of its ubiquitination activity. Given the relatively high mutation rates in c-CBL as well as RTKs such as MET and EGFR, it is likely that their combined effect could be synergistic in promoting tumorigenesis. 
3||Recent evidence has demonstrated that acquired uniparental disomy (aUPD) is a novel mechanism by which pathogenetic mutations in cancer may be reduced to homozygosity. To help identify novel mutations in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), we performed a genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) screen to identify aUPD in 58 patients with atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML; n = 30), JAK2 mutation–negative myelofibrosis (MF; n = 18), or JAK2 mutation–negative polycythemia vera (PV; n = 10). Stretches of homozygous, copy neutral SNP calls greater than 20Mb were seen in 10 (33%) aCML and 1 (6%) MF, but were absent in PV. In total, 7 different chromosomes were involved with 7q and 11q each affected in 10% of aCML cases. CBL mutations were identified in all 3 cases with 11q aUPD and analysis of 574 additional MPNs revealed a total of 27 CBL variants in 26 patients with aCML, myelofibrosis or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Most variants were missense substitutions in the RING or linker domains that abrogated CBL ubiquitin ligase activity and conferred a proliferative advantage to 32D cells overexpressing FLT3. We conclude that acquired, transforming CBL mutations are a novel and widespread pathogenetic abnormality in morphologically related, clinically aggressive MPNs.  Introduction  Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders characterized by overproliferation of one or more myeloid cell lineages in the bone marrow and increased numbers of mature and immature myeloid cells in the peripheral blood. Excess proliferation is frequently associated with splenomegaly and cardiovascular complications as well as increased risk of transformation to acute leukemia. MPNs are categorized into subtypes based on specific morphologic, hematologic, and laboratory parameters, the best characterized being the 4 so-called classic MPNs: polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), primary myelofibrosis (MF), and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).1 In addition, several atypical MPNs are recognized, some of which show both dysplastic and proliferative features, such as atypical, BCR-ABL negative CML (aCML).2  MPNs are associated with acquired, activating mutations or gene fusions of tyrosine kinases, abnormalities that are believed to be critical drivers of excess proliferation as a result of deregulated or constitutive signaling.3 The 2 most prominent examples are BCR-ABL in CML4 and the V617F JAK2 mutation in PV, ET, and MF,5⇓⇓–8 but more than 40 variant tyrosine kinase fusions have been identified in MPNs as well as other mutations in JAK2 and FLT3.2 Activating mutations have been described in components that signal upstream (eg, MPL) or downstream (eg, NRAS) of tyrosine kinases9,10; however, the molecular pathogenesis of the majority of atypical MPNs and approximately 50% of ET and MF cases remains obscure.  V617F JAK2 was initially identified by several different routes, one of which was based on the observation that many PV patients show evidence of acquired uniparental disomy (aUPD) at chromosome 9p.11,12 Regions of aUPD exhibit loss of heterozygosity (LOH) compared with constitutional DNA without change of copy number and arise by mitotic recombination followed by selection for one of the products. After the initial observations in PV, it has emerged that aUPD is common in both hematologic and epithelial malignancies, and is associated with known oncogenic changes in a variety of genes within the affected regions.13 In this study we set out to determine whether aUPD characterizes MPNs of unknown molecular etiology and, if so, whether it could be used as a tool to help identify novel driver mutations.  Methods  Patients  Peripheral blood or bone marrow samples were received from patients diagnosed with an MPN or other hematologic malignancy according to standard morphologic, hematologic, and laboratory criteria. Clinical data were available from a subset of these cases. The study was approved by the Internal Review Boards from participating institutions and informed consent was obtained in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.  SNP array analysis  DNA labeling and hybridization to Affymetrix 50k XbaI chips was performed at the Deutsches Ressourcenzentrum für Genomforschung (RZPD, Berlin, Germany). Raw data were imported into the Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software, analyzed using Affymetrix (High Wycombe, United Kingdom) GeneChip Genotyping Analysis Software (GTYPE 4.1) and copy number analysis tool (CNAT). Data were exported to custom-designed spreadsheets that display loss of heterozygosity and copy number changes in ideogram format. Data were also analyzed using Affymetrix Genotyping Console (version 2.1). Overall, a median of 98.2% (range, 91.5%-99.6%) of SNPs gave readable calls.  Mutation analysis  Detection of mutations by high resolution melting (HRM) analysis was performed as described14 using a Rotor-Gene 6000 (Corbett Life Sciences, St Neots, United Kingdom). Direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products was performed by standard techniques on an ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, United Kingdom) and analyzed using Mutation Surveyor (SoftGenetics, State College, PA). CBL mutations are numbered relative to the ATG (A = 1) in the Ensembl cDNA sequence ENSG00000110395. A dropping factor (relative intensity drop of the wild-type allele peak relative to that seen in a concurrently run normal sample) of 60% or more was considered indicative of a biallelic mutation whereas a dropping factor of less than 60% was considered as monoallelic. Primer sequences for CBL exon 8 were CBL_i7f (5′-tgtggtttcactttaaaccctgga-3′) and CBL_i8r (5′-gccaggccaccccttgtatc-3′) and for CBL exon 9 were CBL_i8f (5′-ggcctggcttttgggttagg-3′) and CBL_i9r (5′-cacaatggattttgccagtctcc-3′). CBL reverse-transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) was performed on random hexamer–reverse transcribed RNA using primers CBLe7F: 5′-gaatcctgatctgactggcttatg-3′ and CBLe10R 5′-gctgcggcagaaggtcaagt-3′. Other primer sequences are available on request.  Microsatellite analysis  DNA samples were amplified with a series of fluorescently labeled primer pairs flanking highly polymorphic microsatellite markers on chromosome 11q as described.10 aUPD was scored if 4 or more consecutive markers encompassing CBL were homozygous without change in allelic copy number (P < .05 of this occurring in the absence of aUPD based on published rates of heterozygosity). Copy number at 11q was estimated by multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) using the Marfan probeset 1 (P065; MRC Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), a kit that contains four 11q control probes including one at 11q23.3.  Constructs  pMY-wtCBL and pMY-CBLR420Q express wild-type and R420Q CBL, respectively, along with green fluorescent protein (GFP).15 Other CBL mutant constructs were derived from pMY-wtCBL using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). pAL/FLT3 and pCMV–HA ubiquitin have also been described previously.15  Cell lines  The IL-3–dependent murine myeloid cell 32Dcl3 (32D) was purchased from the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (Braunschweig, Germany) and was maintained in 90% RPMI 1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 10% WEHI-3B conditioned medium (WEHI). All cells were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5% carbon dioxide. 32D cells were stably transduced by electroporation with wt-FLT3 in a pAL vector as previously described16 and maintained in 15 ng/mL blastocidin (Invitrogen, Paisley United Kingdom). The Platinum-E (Plat-E) retrovirus packaging cell line17 was transfected using the calcium phosphate method with 5 μg CBL construct DNA: 106 32D/wtFLT3 cells were cocultivated with the Plat-E cells for 48 hours in a volume of 2 mL (50% RPMI, 50% DMEM, 10% FBS, 5% WEHI). GFP positive cells were flow sorted to highest possible purity using a BD FACSAria cell sorter (Becton Dickinson, Stanford, CA). If insufficient cells were obtained for experiments after flow sorting, the cells were maintained in culture and resorted to greater than 95% purity.  Growth factor withdrawal assays  Cell growth was compared with wt-FLT3, vector-only transfected cells and the parental 32D line in stably transfected cells. Cells (105/mL) were grown over 3 days in triplicate for each CBL mutant and a wt-CBL control in 96-well plates. Cultures were analyzed daily for proliferation using the Aqueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay kit (MTS assay; Promega, Southampton, United Kingdom). All experiments were performed at least 3 times independently and results were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 4 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).  Ubiquitin ligase activity  The ubiquitin ligase activity of CBL mutants in comparison to wild-type CBL was determined by transiently transfecting 107 32D/wtFLT3 cells expressing wild-type or CBL mutants by electroporation with 20 μg pCMV-HA ubiquitin. Cells were maintained in culture with WEHI for 12 hours after transfection before being washed, serum deprived overnight, exposed to FLT3 ligand for 10 minutes, and lysed in buffer as described.18 Lysates were incubated with a FLT3-specific polyclonal antibody overnight at 4°C. Protein G agarose beads (100 μL) were added and incubated at 4°C for 4 hours. The beads were washed 4 times in ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer. The supernatant was mixed with sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) sample loading buffer before immunoblot analyses with antibodies against HA-ubiquitin (sc-805; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), CBL (2111C3a; Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom), and FLT3 (sc-479; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA).  Results  SNP array analysis  We performed genome-wide SNP analysis on leukocyte DNA extracted from 58 MPD patients: aCML (n = 30), V617F JAK2 negative MF (n = 18), and JAK2 mutation negative PV/idiopathic erythrocytosis (n = 10). As comparators, we also analyzed cases of CML in transformation to blast crisis (n = 30, of which 20 were myeloid and 10 lymphoid) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; n = 20). We conservatively defined likely regions of aUPD as at least 20 Mb of absent or significantly reduced heterozygous SNP calls (ie, < 5% SNPs called as heterozygous) running to a telomere without change in copy number (Figure 1A). Such large regions are uncommon in healthy individuals.19 Strikingly, we found that aUPD was common in aCML with 10 (33%) of cases affected. In contrast, aUPD was only seen in a single case of MF and was not seen in other patient subgroups. In total, 7 different chromosomes were affected, with abnormalities at 7q and 11q each seen recurrently in 10% of aCML cases. The affected regions ranged in size from 29 Mb to a complete copy of chromosome 13 (Table 1).  Figure 1 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 1 Single nucleotide polymorphism array results and initial mutation analysis. (A) Array analysis of 2 control patients showing copy number (CN) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) outputs. The x-axis for the CN plots show (copy number)−2 as determined by CNAT, with values approaching or exceeding −1 indicating deletions and greater than +1 indicating amplifications. The x-axis for LOH shows log10 P values (ie, 20 indicates 10−20). The 2 panels on the left are from a polycythemia vera (PV) case with a homozygous V617F JAK2 mutation. There is no gross copy number change (individual datapoints spread around the zero line), but a large block of homozygous SNP calls at 9p indicative of aUPD. The 2 panels on the right are from a chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) blast crisis case and show LOH accompanied by a 20q deletion. (B) For case UPN 5, a large block of 11q aUPD is apparent on analysis of granulocytes but almost completely absent from mononuclear cells (MNCs) extracted from the same sample. (C) Chromosome 1p aUPD in case UPN 27 is associated with a biallelic G>T MPL mutation that is predicted to result in a W515L substitution. (D) Whole chromosome 13 isodisomy in case UPN 28 associated with a homozygous FLT3 ITD. Two controls are shown: an acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient previously known to have a heterozygous FLT3 ITD and a healthy individual. View inlineView popup Table 1 Chromosomal regions and cases affected by aUPD Association between aUPD and known acquired oncogenic mutations  Although we did not have constitutional DNA to formally confirm that the regions of homozygosity were acquired, in 1 individual we found a marked reduction in the proportion of 11q aUPD positive cells on comparison of mononuclear cells and granulocytes, consistent with an acquired abnormality (Figure 1B). Some of the affected regions harbor genes known to be relevant to hematologic malignancies and therefore we assessed their mutational status. Sequencing of the MPL gene in the case UPN 27 with 1p aUPD revealed a homozygous G>T change (Figure 1C) that results in the previously reported W515L substitution.9 Case UPN 28 with whole chromosome 13 UPD had a homozygous FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD; Figure 1D). Candidate genes for the abnormalities at 17q and 21q include NF1 and RUNX1, respectively; however, these were not investigated.  11q aUPD is associated with CBL mutations  Next, we focused our analysis on the 2 recurrent regions of aUPD at 7q and 11q. Because of the strong association between MPNs and aberrant tyrosine kinase signaling, we analyzed genes encoding tyrosine kinases and associated signaling components. The minimally affected region at chromosome 7q contains 3 tyrosine kinases: MET, EPHA1, and EPHB6. We fully sequenced the coding exons of these genes in the 3 cases with 7q aUPD and 2 normal controls but found no abnormalities. Similarly, we found no sequence changes in exons 11 through 17 of BRAF, a gene encoding a downstream component of RAS signaling that is mutated in malignant melanoma and other cancers.20 There are no tyrosine kinase genes on chromosome 11q, and although there are several genes encoding signal transduction components, CBL stood out as a known oncogene that negatively regulates tyrosine kinase signaling.21 Sequencing of CBL in the three 11q aUPD cases revealed that UPN 2 and UPN 5 each had a T>C change at nucleotide 1277 in exon 8 that predicts a L380P substitution. Case UPN 3 had a C>G missense change in exon 9 at nucleotide 1387 that predicts a P417A change (Figure 2). Consistent with the array results, the mutations in cases UPN 3 and UPN 5 were predominant with the residual wild-type alleles only weakly visible. For case UPN 2 both the mutation and level of aUPD was less prominent, presumably due to a greater background of normal cells.  Figure 2 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 2 CBL mutations in the 3 cases with 11q aUPD. (A) Genotyping Console output indicating homozygous SNP calls in green, copy number state as estimated by a Hidden Markov Model in blue, and smoothed copy number log(2) ratio values in red. (B) Ideograms showing lack of large copy number changes and blocks of homozygosity at 11q. Abbreviations are as in Figure 1. (C) Sequence changes indicated by ↓ in each case compared with normal controls. UPN 2 and UPN 5 each have the c.1139T>C: L380P mutation whereas UPN 3 has c.1249C>G: P417A. Prevalence and nature of CBL mutations  To determine the prevalence of CBL mutations, we sequenced exons 8 and 9 (that encode amino acids 366 through 409 and 410 through 477, respectively) in an additional 574 MPN cases. A total of 27 sequence variants were identified in 26 patients, of whom 3 had MF, 10 had chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), 12 had aCML and 1 had hypereosinophilic syndrome/chronic eosinophilic leukemia (HES/CEL; Tables 2 and 3). To ensure that we were not missing mutations elsewhere in the gene we analyzed all coding exons in 70 CBL mutation negative aCML or unclassified, CML-like MPN cases by high resolution melt (HRM) analysis but failed to detect any further sequence changes apart from known polymorphisms. Similarly, no mutations in CBLB exons 9 or 10 or CBLC exons 7 and 8 (the exons that correspond to CBL exons 8 and 9) were identified. The activity of BCR-ABL is known to increase during progression of CML from chronic phase to blast crisis22 and we speculated that abrogation of CBL activity might be at least partially responsible for this increase. HRM analysis of CBL exons 8 and 9 in blast crisis cases (n = 31), however, failed to reveal any mutations.  View inlineView popup Table 2 Cases analyzed for CBL mutations View inlineView popup Table 3 List of CBL sequence variants Of the 27 CBL variants, 21 (78%) were missense substitutions affecting 12 amino acids (15 different substitutions), 5 (19%) were candidate splicing abnormalities, and 1 (3%) produced a stop codon (Table 3). Most of the changes were novel, although 4 cases had R420Q as previously identified in a single case of AML.15 Apart from N454D, all residues affected by missense mutations were completely conserved in CBL orthologues as well as the 2 other human CBL family members (Figure 3). The mutation to a stop codon was found in a patient (UPN 9) who also had the Y371H variant; PCR across the affected regions and sequencing indicated that the 2 changes were on different alleles.  Figure 3 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 3 Location of missense mutations. (Top panel) Schematic representation of the CBL protein showing the tyrosine kinase binding (TKB), linker, RING, proline-rich (P-rich), and ubiquitin-associated/leucine zipper (UBA/LZ) domains. (Bottom panel) ClustalW alignment of the entire linker and RING domains plus part of the distal sequence. The RING domain is shaded in gray with the defining C and H residues shaded pale blue. Residues affected by missense mutations found in this study are indicated by ▼. CBL mutations are acquired and rarely seen in conjunction with other known mutations  For 2 cases (UPN 5 and UPN 14) we were able to compare the mutational status of leukocytes and T cells or buccal epithelia cells. In both cases the L380P mutation was only present in leukocytes and was therefore acquired (Figure 4A). A third case (UPN 15) originally presented with V617F JAK2 negative ET in 1989 but progressed to MF in 2004. Analysis of DNA extracted from sequential bone marrow slides indicated that the R420Q mutation was absent at the ET phase but acquired on transformation (Figure 4B). The 3 CBL-positive MF cases tested negative for MPL 515 mutations and all CBL mutation positive cases were negative for cytogenetic indicators of tyrosine kinase fusions, FLT3 ITD, activating NRAS mutations and V617F JAK2, with the exception of 1 case (UPN 14) with MF who tested positive for both L380P CBL and V617F JAK2. Analysis of retrospective bone marrow slides for this case indicated the presence of V617F JAK2 at low level initially but absence of L380P CBL. The CBL mutation was detectable 7 years later and completely displaced V617F after a further 3 years, corresponding with a significant rise is peripheral leukocyte counts (Figure 4C). A further case (UPN 21) presented with systemic mastocytosis before evolving to CBL mutation-positive CMML but retrospective samples were unavailable.  Figure 4 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 4 Acquisition of CBL mutations. (A) Comparison of granulocytes (gran) with buccal epithelial cells (bucc) or T cells (T) demonstrates that the L380P mutations in cases UPN 5 and 14 are acquired. (B) Sequential leukocyte and platelet counts for case, who presented in 1989 with essential thrombocythemia (ET) but progressed to myelofibrosis (MF) in 2004. Homozygous CBL R420Q, indicated by *, was detected on transformation but was undetectable in previous specimens. (C) Clinical course of case UPN 14, who presented with MF in 1998 but experienced elevated leukocyte counts in 2005, concomitant with the appearance of the CBL L380P mutation. The JAK2 V617F mutation, which had been present at low level since diagnosis, was still detectable when CBL L380P first appeared but was undetectable in the 2008 sample, when the CBL mutated clone predominated (* on sequence trace). (D) RT-PCR analysis. All cases and controls show the expected product from CBL exons 7-10. Cases UPN 18 and UPN 20 show smaller bands that result from complete deletion of exon 8. Splicing abnormalities  RNA was available for 3 of the 5 cases with potential splicing mutations. Patients UPN 18 and UPN 20 both exhibited double bands by RT-PCR, sequencing of which showed one to be the normal product and the smaller band to result from the complete deletion of exon 8 in each case (Figure 4D), similar to that described in the cell line MOLM-13.23 Patient UPN 19 showed a single band by RT-PCR that was entirely normal on sequence analysis indicating that the exon 8+4 C>T change does not alter splicing. It seems likely, therefore, that the variant identified in case UPN 6 is also of no consequence. The pathogenicity of the intronic variant seen in case UPN 13 remains unknown.  The association between CBL mutations and UPD  To examine the association between CBL mutations and aUPD in more detail we performed microsatellite analysis on all mutated cases using 9 polymorphic markers spanning chromosome 11q13-qter. Of the 26 cases, 11 displayed patterns that indicated significant tracts of homozygosity, including all 3 with 11q aUPD detected by SNP arrays. Case UPN 9 with 2 mutations was heterozygous for all markers. Of the 11 cases with biallelic CBL mutations as judged by sequence analysis, 5 showed complete homozygosity at all microsatellite loci tested and 6 had at least 4 consecutive homozygous calls encompassing the location of the CBL gene at 11q23.3 (Figure 5). We performed multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) analysis to determine whether the observed homozygosity was a consequence of a deletion but no copy number changes were detected (data not shown) and therefore it is likely that homozygosity arose by aUPD. The number of mutated alleles estimated by sequencing was concordant with the microsatellite analysis in 20 cases (Figure 5). Of those that were discordant, UPN 6 and UPN 25 had significant tracts of 11q homozygosity but had a monoallelic CBL mutation whereas UPN 10 and UPN 16 did not show 11q homozygosity but had clear biallelic CBL mutations. The reason for these discrepant cases is unclear, but it is possible that the aUPD seen in UPN 6 and UPN 25 targeted another gene at 11q before acquisition of the CBL mutation. Homozygosity for the CBL mutations in the absence of 11q aUPD in UPN 10 and UPN 16 might be explained by a subcytogenetic deletion of 1 allele.  Figure 5 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 5 Microsatellite analysis of CBL mutation positive cases. The number of CBL mutated alleles (1 monoallelic; 2 biallelic) was estimated by sequence analysis as described in “Experimental procedures.” Microsatellites were scored as homozygous (Embedded Image) or heterozygous (□) for each case and their positions on chromosome 11q are indicated. Correlation between CBL mutations and clinical features  We compared clinical and hematologic features in patients with or without CBL mutations, restricting the analysis to cases with aCML, MF and CMML because these were the subgroups in which CBL mutations were most commonly found. Patients with CBL mutations had a shorter overall survival and progression-free survival compared with mutation negative cases (overall survival: 33 months vs 39 months; progression-free survival: 22 months vs 32 months) but the differences were not significant (Figure 6). Similarly there was no significant difference in gender distribution, age and standard hematologic parameters between mutation positive and mutation negative cases and no differences emerged when individual disease entities were considered.  Figure 6 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 6 Clinical significance of CBL mutations. Overall survival (A) and progression-free survival (B) for atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML), chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), and MF cases with (n = 19) or without (n = 87) CBL mutations. The differences between mutation positive and negative cases was not significant as determined by Kaplan-Meier analysis. Transforming activities of CBL mutants  We determined whether selected CBL variants had oncogenic activity by testing whether they could transform the interleukin-3 (IL-3)–dependent cell line 32D to growth factor independence in conjunction with overexpression of wild-type FLT3, as has been described previously for R420Q.15 We found that S376F, H398Y, P417A, and R420Q alone each conferred a degree of growth factor independence to 32D cells, but this effect was considerably enhanced in 32Ds that overexpressed wild-type FLT3. In contrast, wild-type CBL conferred no growth advantage either with or without FLT3 overexpression. The N454D change was not transforming, indicating that it is probably a rare polymorphism or a pathogenetically unimportant passenger mutation (Figure 7). Reproducible differences in survival between the different mutants were seen, as illustrated in Figure 8A.  Figure 7 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 7 Transforming activity of CBL mutants. 32D cells or 32Ds overexpressing wild-type FLT3 were transfected with wild-type or mutant CBL constructs and assayed for IL-3 independent growth over 3 days. Results shown are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments, each of which were performed in triplicate. The y-axis shows proliferation in arbitrary units as determined by MTS assay (Promega) and the x-axis time in days. Figure 8 Download figureOpen in new tabDownload powerpoint Figure 8 Survival and abrogation of E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. (A) Relative survival/proliferation of 32D cells expressing wild-type or mutant CBL constructs 48 hours after growth factor withdrawal as determined by MTS assay. (B) 32D cells expressing wild-type FLT3 and CBL constructs as indicated were transfected with HA-tagged ubiquitin and stimulated with FLT3 ligand. After lysis, FLT3 was immunoprecipitated, blotted, and probed with anti-HA. Total blots for FLT3 AND CBL are also shown. Abrogation of E3 ubiquitin ligase activity  It has been shown that FLT3 physically associates with CBL and that, upon ligand stimulation, FLT3 is rapidly ubiquitinylated by wild-type but not R420Q CBL.15 We found that transforming activity correlated directly with the ubiquitin ligase activity of the CBL variants, as assayed by their ability to transfer HA-tagged ubiquitin to FLT3 after stimulation with FLT3 ligand. The S376F, H398Y, P417A and R420Q mutants showed loss of ubiquitin ligase activity, whereas N454D was comparable to wild-type CBL (Figure 8B).  Discussion  The initial aim of our study was to identify large regions of aUPD and therefore we undertook a relatively low resolution genome scan using 50k SNP arrays. Because we did not have constitutional DNA available from most of our cases, we were not able to unambiguously determine whether the extended blocks of homozygosity that we observed were a consequence of aUPD, constitutional UPD or autozygosity due to consaguinity, however we used a very conservative definition of candidate aUPD regions (at least 20 Mb homozygous SNPs calls running to a telomere) and therefore expected that most or all would be acquired. We found that aUPD was relatively common in aCML, but was uncommon in other MPNs that were negative for known mutations, plus also CML blast crisis and CLL. Six distinct regions of aUPD were identified in aCML, indicating substantial genetic heterogeneity in the genesis of this disorder. However, we identified 2 recurrent regions of aUPD at 7q and 11q that were each seen in 10% of cases indicating the presence of common molecular abnormalities.  Our mutation screening focused primarily on tyrosine kinases and associated signal transduction components because of the known association between deregulated tyrosine kinase signaling and MPNs.3 Although we failed thus far to identify any abnormality on chromosome 7q, we found missense CBL mutations in all three 11q aUPD cases. Screening of further MPNs revealed a total of 27 CBL variants in 26 patients who had been diagnosed with aCML (n = 12; 8%), MF (n = 3, 6%), CMML (n = 10, 13%), or HES/CEL (n = 1, 1%); that is, morphologically and clinically related diseases that generally exhibit a poor prognosis. We were unable to discern, however, any specific clinical or prognostic features specifically associated with CBL mutated cases.  Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (CBL) is a well characterized protein that plays both positive and negative regulatory roles in tyrosine kinase signaling. In its positive role, CBL binds to activated receptor tyrosine kinases via its N-terminal tyrosine kinase binding (TKB) domain and serves as an adaptor by recruiting downstream signal transduction components such as SHP2 and P13K. However the RING domain of CBL has E3 ligase activity and ubiquitinylates activated receptor tyrosine kinases on lysine residues, a signal that triggers internalization of the receptor/ligand complex and subsequent recycling or degradation.21,24,25 CBL was originally identified after the characterization of v-Cbl, the transforming component of the Cas NS-1 retrovirus, and thus its association with neoplasia is well established26; however, it is only very recently that CBL mutations were first identified in a human malignancy, specifically occasional cases of AML.15,23,27 We have found that CBL mutations are much more common in MPNs, and previous reports of 11q aUPD in MDS28 suggest that CBL mutations will also prove to be common in this disease. Indeed, 7 of 12 MDS cases with aUPD at 11q were recently shown to harbor CBL mutations.29 There are 2 other human CBL family members, CBLB and CBLC, but we did not identify aUPD in the regions containing these genes and did not detect any mutations of the linker/RING domain of CBLB.  We identified a total of 15 different CBL missense mutations affecting 12 residues (Table 2; Figure 3). Mutations of some of these residues (eg, Y371, C381, H398 and W408) have been analyzed previously in a study that concluded that loss of E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and concomitant impairment of EGFR internalization by RING finger mutations was insufficient for oncogenicity, as assayed in NIH3T3 cells. However mutations of key residues within the α-helix of the linker region abolished ubiquitin ligase activity and were transforming.30 Although the precise amino acid substitutions we identified were different from those studied, we found that mutations in both the RING finger and linker regions conferred autonomous growth to 32D/wt-FLT3 cells, consistent with a causal relationship to the MPN phenotype. The fact that one mutation (N454D) was not transforming emphasizes the importance of functional analysis to distinguish driver mutations from irrelevant passengers or infrequent polymorphisms.31 Notably, this mutation was only weakly conserved between species, in contrast to all other missense mutations that affected highly conserved residues and are therefore likely to be functionally significant.  Enhanced autonomous growth in the presence of CBL mutations and overexpression of wild-type FLT3 may simply reflect the paucity of receptor tyrosine kinase gene expression in 32D cells or, alternatively, may indicate that the mutants are only weakly transforming and require the cooperation of other events to give rise to clinically manifest disease. Consistent with the latter hypothesis, we identified 2 cases in which CBL mutations were acquired during progression of a preexisting MPN (Figure 4). In both cases the identity of the cooperating change is unknown: although one presented with a (relatively low level) V617F JAK2 mutation, this disappeared on progression to CBL L380P positive disease, indicating that the 2 mutations must have arisen independently in different clones. This is reminiscent of the observation that the leukemic blasts of approximately half of V617F positive MPNs that evolve to AML are negative for the JAK2 mutation.32,33 It remains to be established, however, if CBL mutations are usually secondary events or whether the 2 cases we identified are exceptional.  Further evidence for the requirement for additional cooperating genetic events comes from published mouse studies in which neither complete CBL knockout nor heterozygous knockin of the RING finger inactivating mutant C379A (mouse C379 is equivalent to human C381) resulted in evidence of an MPN or other malignancy.34,35 However, closer analysis revealed subtle hemopoietic perturbations that clearly relate to the pathogenesis of MPNs. Specifically, hemopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from these animals were increased in number, hyperresponsive to thrombopoietin and more potent than wild-type HSCs in repopulating the hemopoietic system. These effects were associated with increased STAT5 accumulation and phosphorylation.34,35 Hyperresponsiveness to growth factors and stem cell involvement are 2 of the cardinal features of MPNs. Furthermore, the association between STAT5 activation and MPNs is well documented.36,37 While it is possible that overt hematologic disease might have been induced by a homozygous knockin mutant, these findings suggest that CBL mutations may not be solely responsible for a full MPN phenotype.  The nature of any cooperating abnormalities remains largely obscure. Our results show that overexpression of a tyrosine kinase can cooperate with CBL mutants to promote transformation, however we failed to identify any kinase that was consistently overexpressed in mutation positive cases by tyrosine kinase expression profiling (data not shown). One CBL mutation positive case, however, also tested positive for 7q UPD by SNP array, suggesting that these 2 abnormalities may complement each other. A CBL mutation resulting in skipping of exon 8 has also been identified in a murine model of NUP98-HOXD13 on progression from MDS to AML,38 further corroborating the theory that acute leukemia arises from complementary mutations, one of which inhibits differentiation, and a second (in this case CBL) that enhances proliferation or inhibits apoptosis.  The fact that many CBL mutations are associated with aUPD strongly suggests that clones with homozygous mutations have a selective advantage over those that are heterozygous. This contrasts with the prevailing view that transforming CBL RING finger and linker region mutants act in a dominant negative fashion. Although it is conceivable that another, unknown locus on 11q is the target of aUPD, the finding of 1 case with a Y371H mutation and a stop codon on opposite alleles strongly suggests that homozygous CBL mutations do indeed confer a direct selective advantage. Because we did not screen the entire gene for mutations, it is possible that other cases with heterozygous mutations may also be functionally homozygous due to premature stop codons on the other allele. Alternatively, heterozygosity in these cases may only be apparent due to variable proportions of background normal cells that are not part of the malignant clone. Although the nontransforming N454D mutant was heterozygous, 2 cases with heterozygous R420Q were observed and thus absence of homozygosity cannot be used to infer the presence of an irrelevant, nontransforming sequence variant.  In summary, we have found that oncogenic CBL mutations are acquired in a subset of hematologically related, poor prognosis MPNs. Our findings further strengthen the notion that MPNs are primarily “tyrosine kinopathies,” that is, diseases caused by aberrant activation of proliferation and survival pathways as a consequence of mutations that either directly or indirectly promote excess tyrosine kinase signaling. In view of the fact that tyrosine kinases are such good drug targets, the possibility that CBL-mutated cases might be amenable to therapeutic inhibition is clearly attractive.  
